Docs fixes, add sample programs and a runner to help with ephemeral TigerBeetle instances (#570)
tigerbeetle/tigerbeetle: docs/usage/two-phase-transfer.md

# Two-phase Transfer

The name "two-phase transfer" is a reference to the [two-phase commit
protocol for distributed
transactions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two-phase_commit_protocol).

Single-phase transfers post funds to accounts immediately when they
are created. That is, they affect the `debits_posted` and
`credits_posted` fields on relevant accounts.

In contrast to single-phase transfers, a two-phase transfer moves
funds in stages:

1. First, the pending transfer reserves funds. While reserved, they
cannot be used by either the payer or payee. Only the `debits_pending`
and `credits_pending` fields are modified on the relevant accounts at
this point.

2. Later, the application creates another transfer — with flags either
marked `post_pending_transfer` or `void_pending_transfer`. The former

> moves all (or part) of the reserved funds to the destination; the

Reviewer: s/destination/"pending transfer's destination", just to be extra-clear (since this is an intro)

Author: Added

> latter reverts them to the original account.

Reviewer: Since `post_pending_transfer`/`void_pending_transfer` are important and this is the first mention of them in this document, can you change them to link to the flags in the `transfers.md` reference document?

Also (unrelated), what do you think of:

2. Later, the application creates another transfer — with either of the following flags:
    - `post_pending_transfer`: Move all (or part) of the reserved funds to the destination.
    - `void_pending_transfer`: Revert all of the reserved funds to the original account.

Author: great!

Author: Added all fields as links.

> 

Reviewer: This document should also talk about timeouts.
Admittedly, they aren't implemented yet, but they will be prior to our release.

(If the pending transfer is created with a timeout (which is optional), then if it has not been posted/voided by the time the timeout expires, then the full amount will be voided.)

Reviewer: Also worth mentioning: A pending transfer can only be "completed" once.
It can't be posted twice, it can't be voided then posted, etc.

Author: Good idea! Added.

## `credits_must_not_exceed_debits` and `debits_must_not_exceed_credits`

The pending transfer's amount is reserved in a way that the second
step in a two-phase transfer will never cause the accounts' configured
balance invariants to be broken, whether the second step is a post or
void.

### Pessimistic pending transfers

If an account with `debits_must_not_exceed_credits` has
`credits_posted = 100` and `debits_posted = 70` and a pending transfer
is started causing the account to have `debits_pending = 50`, the
*pending* transfer will fail. It will not wait to get to *posted*
status to fail.

## All transfers are immutable

To reiterate, completing a two-phase transfer (by either marking it

> void or posted) does not involve modifying a transfer. Instead you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
void or posted) does not involve modifying the pending transfer. Instead you
```

Author: Accepted locally :+1:

create a new transfer.

The first transfer that is marked pending will always have its pending
flag set.

The second transfer will have a `post_pending_transfer` or
`void_pending_transfer` flag set and a `pending_id` field set to the

> ID of the first transfer. The ID of the second transfer will be

Reviewer: Instead of "ID", what about `id` (with backtick-quotes)? (That makes it more clear that we aren't informally referring to the `pending_id`, which was just mentioned.)

Author: Good idea, adjusted.

# Two-phase Transfer

This is a reference to the [two-phase commit protocol for distributed

> transactions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two-phase_commit_protocol).

Reviewer: Maybe something like:

> The name "two-phase transfer" is a reference to ...(etc)

To disambiguate since "This" _page_ is a reference to two-phase transfers, not 2PC.

Author: Gotcha, can do

Single-phase transfers post funds to accounts immediately when they
are created. That is, they affect the `debits_posted` and
`credits_posted` fields on relevant accounts.

In contrast to single-phase transfers, a two-phase transfer moves
funds in stages:

1. First, the pending transfer reserves funds. While reserved, they
cannot be used by either the payer or payee. Only the `debits_pending`
and `credits_pending` fields are modified on the relevant accounts at
this point.

2. Later, the application creates another transfer — with flags either
marked `post_pending_transfer` or `void_pending_transfer`. The former
moves all (or part) of the reserved funds to the destination; the
latter reverts them to the original account.

## `credits_must_not_exceed_debits` and `debits_must_not_exceed_credits`

The pending transfer's amount is reserved in a way that the second
step in a two-phase transfer will never cause the account's configured

> balance invariants to be broken.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
step in a two-phase transfer will never cause the accounts' configured
balance invariants to be broken.
```

(The invariants of both the debit and credit accounts are enforced.)

Also might be worth clarifying that the invariants hold whether the pending transfer is posted or voided.

### Optimistic pending transfers

If an account with `debits_must_not_exceed_credits` has
`credits_posted = 100` and `debits_posted = 70` and a pending transfer
is started causing the account to have `debits_pending = 50`, the

> *pending* transfer will still succeed.

Reviewer: This is incorrect; the pending transfer would fail with `exceeds_credits`.
I would consider pending transfers pessimistic.

Author: Joran suggested the opposite. I didn't run a test program but I will do so now. :D

Author: Yeah you're right, DJ! The pending transfer failed for me.

transactions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two-phase_commit_protocol).

Single-phase transfers post funds to accounts immediately when they

> are created. That is, they affect the

Reviewer: nit: s/affect/increase (to be a little more specific)

Author: :+1: done, thanks!

[`debits_posted`](../usage/accounts.md#debits_posted) and
[`credits_posted`](../usage/accounts.md#credits_posted) fields on
relevant accounts.

In contrast to single-phase transfers, a two-phase transfer moves
funds in stages:

1. First, the pending transfer reserves funds. While reserved, they
cannot be used by either the payer or payee. Only the
[`debits_pending`](../usage/accounts.md#debits_pending) and
[`credits_pending`](../usage/accounts.md#credits_pending) fields are

> modified on the relevant accounts at this point.

Reviewer: s/modified/increased
s/relevant/respective

Author: Taken, thanks

2. Later, the application creates another transfer — with either of
   the following flags:
* [`post_pending_transfer`](../usage/transfers.md#flagspost_pending_transfer): Move all (or part) of the reserved funds to the pending transfer's destination.

> * [`void_pending_transfer`](../usage/transfers.md#flagsvoid_pending_transfer): Revert all of the reserved funds to the original account.

Reviewer: Ok I know I suggested this change.. but I think we should expand this a bit (either here or in a follow-up paragraph).
Lets make it more clear that the money being moved/reverted is what is was originally added to the pending debits/credits, and that the pending transfer's modification to the pending debits/credits is undone.

Author: Ok, took a stab at that in the paragraph following bullet point 2.

cannot be used by either the payer or payee. Only the
[`debits_pending`](../reference/accounts.md#debits_pending) and
[`credits_pending`](../reference/accounts.md#credits_pending) fields are
increased on the relevant accounts at this point.

2. Later, the application creates another transfer — with either of
   the following flags:
* [`post_pending_transfer`](../reference/transfers.md#flagspost_pending_transfer): Move all (or part) of the reserved funds to the pending transfer's destination.
* [`void_pending_transfer`](../reference/transfers.md#flagsvoid_pending_transfer): Revert all of the reserved funds to the original account.

Once the pending transfer is posted or voided, the
[`debits_pending`](../reference/accounts.md#debits_pending) and
[`credits_pending`](../reference/accounts.md#credits_pending) fields
on the relevant accounts are decreased by the
[`amount`](../reference/transfer.md#amount) of the transfer. And the
[`debits_posted`](../reference/accounts.md#debits_posted) and
[`credits_posted`](../reference/accounts.md#credits_posted) fields on

> the relevant accounts are increased by that same amount.

Reviewer: The pending part is right, but the posted part needs more detail.
Transfers can be partially posted, in which case they may increase but only a subset of the pending amount.
Or when voided, then the posted debits/credits don't change at all.

Author: I added a section on "Posting a subset of pending `amount`" which maybe addresses your first concern. But I don't understand the latter.

Reviewer: How about something like this?

When the pending transfer is resolved (posted or voided),
[`debits_pending`](../reference/accounts.md#debits_pending) and
[`credits_pending`](../reference/accounts.md#credits_pending) fields
on the respective accounts are decreased by the
[`amount`](../reference/transfer.md#amount) of the _pending_ transfer.

When the pending transfer is posted,
[`debits_posted`](../reference/accounts.md#debits_posted) and
[`credits_posted`](../reference/accounts.md#credits_posted) fields on
the respective accounts are increased by the _posting_ transfer's `amount`
(which cannot exceed the pending amount).

When the pending transfer is voided,
[`debits_posted`](../reference/accounts.md#debits_posted) and
[`credits_posted`](../reference/accounts.md#credits_posted) are not modified.

Author: Looks good, added a short phrase to clarify posted amount need not equal pending amount either
